[Multi-Screen Window Placement API ] Update article for second OT (#5591)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/multi-screen-window-placement/index.md

  The Multi-Screen Window Placement API allows you to enumerate the displays connected to your
  machine and to place windows on specific screens.
date: 2020-09-14

> updated: 2021-06-11

Author: ```suggestion
updated: 2021-06-14
```

> updated: 2021-06-11

Author: ```suggestion
updated: 2021-06-14
```

> updated: 2021-06-14

Reviewer: Do you know when the OT will be live? We could use `scheduled: true` and merge this as soon as the edit is done. (I prefer that because nobody has to remember to loop back and merge this.)

Author: @michaelwasserman will know.

Reviewer 2: We are pretty confident we'll start OT2 in M93. Maybe set the date around the first M93 Beta (Thu July 29)?

Author: @michaelwasserman, if you ping the URL once you know it, I can then put it into the article and take care of merging if @jpmedley approves the article in the current state, with the only pending addition being the URL (and updating the publishing date to whatever date it may be).

Author: I have added the `updated` date that is in the far future :-) of July and the `scheduled: true` flag. Not sure if this works for already published articles, but with the `Do not merge` label we're also on the safe side.

  The Multi-Screen Window Placement API allows you to enumerate the displays connected to your
  machine and to place windows on specific screens.
date: 2020-09-14
updated: 2021-07-29
scheduled: true
tags:
  - blog
  - capabilities
hero: image/admin/9wQYJACMKOM6aUA0BPsW.jpg
alt: Simulated trading desk showing multiple fake cryptocurrencies and their price charts.
origin_trial:

>   url: https://developers.chrome.com/origintrials

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  url: https://developer.chrome.com/origintrials/#/view_trial/-8087339030850568191
```

Here's the new origin trial link.

| 1. Create explainer                      | [Complete][explainer]    |
| 2. Create initial draft of specification | [Complete][spec]         |
| 3. Gather feedback & iterate on design   | [In progress](#feedback) |

> | 4. Origin trial                          | Upcoming                 |

Author: ```suggestion
| 4. **Origin trial**                          | **[In progress](https://developer.chrome.com/origintrials/#/view_trial/-8087339030850568191)**                 |
```

### Enabling support during the origin trial phase

A first origin trial ran from Chromium&nbsp;86 to Chromium&nbsp;88. After this origin trial, we made
some [changes](https://github.com/webscreens/window-placement/blob/main/CHANGES.md) to the API. The
article has been updated accordingly.

> Starting in Chromium&nbsp;92, the Multi-Screen Window Placement API will again be available as an
> origin trial in Chromium. This second origin trial is expected to end in Chromium&nbsp;95.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Starting in Chromium&nbsp;93, the Multi-Screen Window Placement API will again be available as an
origin trial in Chromium. This second origin trial is expected to end in Chromium&nbsp;96.
```

We had a discussion today and decided to push this back to M93.

```js
let granted = false;
try {
  const { state } = await navigator.permissions.query({ name: 'window-placement' });
  granted = state === 'granted';
} catch {
  // Nothing.
}
```

The browser

> [can](https://webscreens.github.io/window-placement/#issue-c601b517:~:text=Permission%20check%20for%20above%3F,-partial)

Reviewer 2: Please update this link, maybe https://webscreens.github.io/window-placement/#usage-overview-screen-information:~:text=This%20method%20may%20prompt%20the%20user%20for%20permission

Author: Done.

> [can](https://webscreens.github.io/window-placement/#issue-c601b517:~:text=Permission%20check%20for%20above%3F,-partial)

Author: ```suggestion
[can](https://webscreens.github.io/window-placement/#usage-overview-screen-information:~:text=This%20method%20may%20prompt%20the%20user%20for%20permission)
```

choose to show the permission prompt dynamically upon the first attempt to use any of the methods of
the new API. Read on to learn more.

### The `window.screen.isExtended` property

To find out if more than one screen is connected to my device, I access the
`window.screen.isExtended` property. It returns `true` or `false`. For my setup, it returns `true`.

```js
window.screen.isExtended;
// Returns `true` or `false`.
```

### The `getScreens()` method

Now that I know that the current setup is multi-screen, I can obtain more information about the

> second screen using `Window.getScreens()`. It returns a promise that resolves with an array of

Reviewer 3: Is it worth mentioning that this prompts the user for permission here?

Reviewer 2: That is covered under "The window-placement permission", but this might be an okay place to remind readers of that.

Author: I'll add it.

> second screen using `Window.getScreens()`. It returns a promise that resolves with an array of

Author: ```suggestion
second screen using `Window.getScreens()`. Calling this function will show a permission prompt that asks me whether the site may open and place windows on my screen. The function returns a promise that resolves with an array of
```

allows me to determine exactly how the screens are arranged logically (next to each other, on top of
each other, etc.). There is also data now for each screen to show whether it is an `isInternal` one
and whether it is an `isPrimary` one. Note that the built-in screen
[is not necessarily the primary screen](https://osxdaily.com/2010/04/27/set-the-primary-display-mac/#:~:text=Click%20on%20the%20Display%20icon,primary%20display%20for%20your%20Mac).
Both also have a `label` and an `id`, which, if persisted across browser sessions, allows for window
arrangements to be restored. Information about the possible input methods are available in the
`pointerTypes` array.

The field `currentScreen` is a live object corresponding to the current `window.screen`. The object
is updated on cross-screen window placements or device changes.

### The `screenschange` event

The only thing missing now is a way to detect when my screen setup changes. A new event,
`screenschange`, does exactly that: it fires whenever the screen constellation is modified. (Notice
that "screens" is plural in the event name.) It also fires when the resolution of one of the

> connected screens changes or when a new or an existing screen is (physically or virtually in the

Reviewer 2: `screenschange` does *not* fire when attributes of a particular screen change, only when some screens are added or removed from the `screens` array. For that, users should use the new `change` event on `Screen` (and `ScreenAdvanced`). Let us know if we can clarify https://webscreens.github.io/window-placement/#api-screens-events or the explainer, etc.

Author: Thanks, clarified.

> that "screens" is plural in the event name.) It also fires when the resolution of one of the
> connected screens changes or when a new or an existing screen is (physically or virtually in the
> case of Sidecar) plugged in or unplugged.

Author: ```suggestion
that "screens" is plural in the event name.) This means the event fires whenever a new or an existing screen is (physically or virtually in the
case of Sidecar) plugged in or unplugged.
```

Note that you need to look up the new screen details asynchronously, the `screenschange` event
itself does not provide this data. This may

> [change in the future](https://github.com/webscreens/window-placement/issues/28). For now you can

Reviewer 2: I closed that issue; we won't add data to the events themselves. Please let us know if you have remaining ergonomics issues/suggestions regarding events, thanks!

Author: With the live objects and the caching of the initial call result of `getScreens()` it still feels like the events passed to the event listeners are a bit superfluous, but it's definitely workable.

Reviewer 2: Is it possible and acceptable API design to trigger event listeners without passing an event object? If so, maybe that would be desirable here?

> look up the screen details by calling `window.getScreens()` as shown below.

Reviewer 2: They can, but really shouldn't need to call getScreens() again. Instead, they can/should use the *live* multi-screen data of a cached `Screens` interface object.

Author: Understood.

> itself does not provide this data. This may
> [change in the future](https://github.com/webscreens/window-placement/issues/28). For now you can
> look up the screen details by calling `window.getScreens()` as shown below.

Author: ```suggestion
itself does not provide this data. To look up the screen details, use the live object from a cached `Screens` interface.
```

```js
const screensInterface = await window.getScreens();
screensInterface.addEventListener('screenschange', async (event) => {

>   const details = await window.getScreens();

Reviewer 2: Consider avoiding the repeated call to getScreens. One practical example here might be something like:

const screensInterface = await window.getScreens();
let cachedScreensLength = screensInterface.screens.length;
screensInterface.addEventListener('screenschange', event => {
  if (screensInterface.screens.length != cachedScreensLength) {
    console.log('The screen count changed from' + cachedScreensLength + ' to' screensInterface.screens.length);
    cachedScreensLength = screensInterface.screens.length;
  }
});

Generally, `screenschange` should correspond to a change in the length of `screens`, but technically it's possible that a single event might fire if N screens were added and N screens were removed simultaneously...

Author: Noted and changed.

> const screensInterface = await window.getScreens();
> screensInterface.addEventListener('screenschange', async (event) => {
>   const details = await window.getScreens();
>   console.log('The screen constellation has changed.', event), details;
> });

Author: ```suggestion
const screensInterface = await window.getScreens();
let cachedScreensLength = screensInterface.screens.length;
screensInterface.addEventListener('screenschange', (event) => {
  if (screensInterface.screens.length !== cachedScreensLength) {
    console.log(`The screen count changed from ${cachedScreensLength} to ${screensInterface.screens.length}`);
    cachedScreensLength = screensInterface.screens.length;
  }
});
```

```

> ### The `currentscreenchange` event

Reviewer 3: Thanks for the text on all the new events.  These look good to me!

Author: :-) Thanks for making the events more explicit, this will help developers subscribe to just the things they need info on.

If I am only interested in changes to the current screen (that is, the value of the live object
`currentScreen`), I can listen for the `currentscreenchange` event.

```js
const screensInterface = await window.getScreens();
screensInterface.addEventListener('currentscreenchange', async (event) => {

>   const details = (await window.getScreens()).currentScreen;

Reviewer 2: Similarly, reuse screensInterface instead of calling getScreens() again

Author: Done.

> const screensInterface = await window.getScreens();
> screensInterface.addEventListener('currentscreenchange', async (event) => {
>   const details = (await window.getScreens()).currentScreen;
>   console.log('The current screen has changed.', event, details);
> });

Author: ```suggestion
const screensInterface = await window.getScreens();
screensInterface.addEventListener('currentscreenchange', async (event) => {
  const details = screensInterface.currentScreen;
  console.log('The current screen has changed.', event, details);
});
```

```

### The `change` event

Finally, if I am only interested in changes to a concrete screen, I can listen to that screen's
`change` event.

```js
const firstScreen = (await window.getScreens())[0];
firstScreen.addEventListener('change', async (event) => {

>   const details = (await window.getScreens())[0];

Reviewer 2: ditto

Author: Done.

>   const details = (await window.getScreens())[0];

Author: ```suggestion
```

>   console.log('The first screen has changed.', event, details);

Author: ```suggestion
  console.log('The first screen has changed.', event, firstScreen);
```

```js
let granted = false;
try {
  const { state } = await navigator.permissions.query({ name: 'window-placement' });
  granted = state === 'granted';
} catch {
  // Nothing.
}
```

The browser
[can](https://webscreens.github.io/window-placement/#usage-overview-screen-information:~:text=This%20method%20may%20prompt%20the%20user%20for%20permission)

> choose to show the permission prompt dynamically upon the first attempt to use any of the methods of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
choose to show the permission prompt dynamically on the first attempt to use any of the methods of
```

    pixelDepth: 30
    pointerTypes: []
    primary: false
    scaleFactor: 2
    top: 0
    touchSupport: false
    width: 1680
  },
  {
    // The iPad
    availHeight: 999
    availLeft: 1680
    availTop: 25
    availWidth: 1366
    colorDepth: 24
    devicePixelRatio: 2
    height: 1024
    id: ""
    internal: false
    isExtended: true
    isInternal: false
    isPrimary: false
    label: ""
    left: 1680
    onchange: null
    orientation: ScreenOrientation {angle: 0, type: "landscape-primary", onchange: null}
    pixelDepth: 24
    pointerTypes: []
    primary: false
    scaleFactor: 2
    top: 0
    touchSupport: false
  }]
}
*/
```

Information about the connected screens is available in the `screens` array. Note how the value of
`left` for the iPad starts at `1680`, which is exactly the `width` of the built-in display. This
allows me to determine exactly how the screens are arranged logically (next to each other, on top of
each other, etc.). There is also data now for each screen to show whether it is an `isInternal` one
and whether it is an `isPrimary` one. Note that the built-in screen

> [is not necessarily the primary screen](https://osxdaily.com/2010/04/27/set-the-primary-display-mac/#:~:text=Click%20on%20the%20Display%20icon,primary%20display%20for%20your%20Mac).

Reviewer: Isn' necessarily or doesn't have to be? The former implies an element of chance, while the later implies my complete control.

Author: "Isn't necessarily". Operating systems may have different heuristics as to which plugged in additional screen they make the primary screen.

Both also have a `label` and an `id`, which, if persisted across browser sessions, allows for window
arrangements to be restored. Information about the possible input methods are available in the
`pointerTypes` array.

> The field `currentScreen` is a live object corresponding to the current `window.screen`. The object

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `currentScreen` field is a live object corresponding to the current `window.screen`. The object
```

### Polyfill

It is not possible to polyfill the Multi-Screen Window Placement API, but you can shim its shape so
you can code exclusively against the new API:

```js
if (!('getScreens' in window)) {
  // Returning a one-element array with the current screen,
  // noting that there might be more.
  window.getScreens = async () => [window.screen];
  // Set to `false`, noting that this might be a lie.
  window.screen.isExtended = false;
}
```

> The other aspects of the API, that is, the `screenschange` event and the `screen` property of the

Reviewer 2: nit: "that is, the screen change events and" (there are multiple events that wouldn't fire)

Author: Gotcha.

> The other aspects of the API, that is, the `screenschange` event and the `screen` property of the

Author: ```suggestion
The other aspects of the API, that is, the various screen change events and the `screen` property of the
```

<!-- Copy and Paste Me -->
<div class="glitch-embed-wrap" style="height: 800px; width: 100%;">

>   <iframe src="https://window-placement.glitch.me/"

Reviewer 2: The feature now has permission policy support, so if an iframe will actually attempt to use the API, it will the iframe will need an "allow='window-placement'" attribute.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, clicking elmer just opens the demo in a separate tab, so perhaps we don't need to support the iframe itself using getScreens(), etc.

Author: I have (had) logic in the demo that would recognize when it was iframed and open in a new tab. With the new permission policy integration we can get rid of this.

    title="window-placement on Glitch"

>     sandbox="allow-popups allow-popups-to-escape-sandbox allow-scripts"

Author: ```suggestion
    allow="window-placement" sandbox="allow-popups allow-popups-to-escape-sandbox allow-scripts"
```

>     allow="window-placement" sandbox="allow-popups allow-popups-to-escape-sandbox allow-scripts"

Author: ```suggestion
    allow="fullscreen; window-placement" sandbox="allow-modals allow-popups allow-popups-to-escape-sandbox allow-scripts"
```

[Victor Costan](https://www.linkedin.com/in/pwnall) and
[Joshua Bell](https://www.linkedin.com/in/joshuaseanbell). The API was implemented by

> [Mike Wasserman](https://www.linkedin.com/in/mike-wasserman-9900a079/). This article was reviewed by

Reviewer 2: Let's credit enne with API development too!

Author: Done.

> [Mike Wasserman](https://www.linkedin.com/in/mike-wasserman-9900a079/). This article was reviewed by

Author: ```suggestion
[Mike Wasserman](https://www.linkedin.com/in/mike-wasserman-9900a079/) and [Adrienne Walker](https://github.com/quisquous). This article was reviewed by
```
